## Introduction
For Black inventors, the racism and structural oppression of their everyday lives extended into the  inventive field, requiring them to carefully navigate the field's political and social aspects; slavery, segregation, and racialized violence affected every aspect of their lives, including the inventive process. As court rulings like ==Plessy V. Ferguson=={Q656660} demonstrated that the government would not recognize the rights of Black Americans, it made it nearly impossible for Black Americans to get around and access much needed segregated patent attorneys, patent libraries, workplaces, and access important information or valuable work experience relating to the process of invention. In the years following the ==Tulsa Race Massacre=={Q1824714}, and in the direct aftermath of the racist laws and leadership that fueled events like it, invention within the Black community became unusually low. 

Fighting uncertainties like personal security, political disenfranchisement, and work discrimination, it becomes clear that this was not an environment that could foster innovation.  The implications of racialized violence in the South stalled Black inventive activity for years. White patents and Black patents followed a [similar patenting trend (though at a much lesser rate) for the majority of the late 1800s](https://spectrum.ieee.org/how-violence-and-segregation-destroyed-african-american-innovation). It has  become apparent that as lynchings and other racialized violence increased, Black invention greatly decreased, which widened the gap between White and Black-patented inventions as well as [increased the economic inequality and oppression already present within the patenting system.](https://spectrum.ieee.org/how-violence-and-segregation-destroyed-african-american-innovation).

Include graphs from Lisa D. Cook (in EM Google Drive)

https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-black-innovators-who-elevated-the-united-states-reassessing-the-golden-age-of-invention/

## Granville T. Woods (1856-1910)
.ve-media wc:Granville_T._Woods_c._1895.jpg left width=80% caption="Granville T. Woods, c. 1895"

Born in 1865 to free African Americans, ==Granville T. Woods=={Q3115447} contributed greatly to the telegraph and railroad industries. Known as "Black Edison," Woods  carved out a a career in invention that would dictate the course of his work immensely. In his early teens, Woods worked in a machine shop, and later worked as a locomotive engineer, which ignited his passion for invention and later helped him make leading breakthroughs in railway technology. However, while railroad technology might have been his passion, his financial situation forced him to patent a number of miscellaneous patents in emerging industries to stay solvent. As patenting required upfront fees, like a standard application fee and all other associated legal fees, Woods would often have to borrow money from acquaintances while he waited for his patents to be used. Stuck in this cycle of being unable to make ends meet, Woods travelled to New York, in 1890,and met James S. Zerbe, the manager of the “American Patent Agency.” Zerbe promised to put him on the rise, but instead exploited Woods for his patents, his knowledge, his shares of the profits, and even his most prized electric railway system (close to the one we see on trains today). Woods would eventually take Zerbe to court and win his patents back.[^1] In his lifetime, he would be granted 45 total patents of which the most notable today are the electric railway system, the electric railway conduit, and the telegraphony. Although Woods was disconnected from larger groups of inventors and their social hubs, unable to find paying work, and was exploited, he is now known as a successful Black inventor who patented some of the most important railway inventions. 

The New York Times recently wrote obituaries for people who deserved, but never had, obituaries in the paper. You can read Woods' [obituary here.](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/obituaries/granville-t-woods-overlooked.html) 
.ve-media default:https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/0e/08/64/8abd6d8fa62fed/US373915-drawings-page-1.png left 30% caption="U.S. Patent No. 373,915"

.ve-media default:https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/5a/b3/7e/d42235775819b8/US762792-drawings-page-1.png right 30% caption="U.S. Patent No.762,792"

## Lewis Latimer (1848-1928)
.ve-media wc:Lewis_latimer.jpg left width=80% caption="Lewis Latimer"
Born in 1848 to enslaved people who escaped to Massachusetts, Lewis Howard Latimer worked to align himself with some of the most well-known abolitionists, and inventors. His father’s freedom had been negotiated and sensationalized by men like ==Frederick Douglass=={Q215562} and ==William Lloyd Garrison=={Q360155}. After enlisting in the Civil War, Latimer would eventually come back to his hometown of Boston to work in a patent attorney’s office where he would secure the job of draftsman, which allowed him to work closely with inventors as well as gain technical and legal knowledge about the patenting system. As this job proved to be a stepping stone for many others, Latimer would move on to draft for ==Alexander Graham Bell’s=={Q34286} telephone patent as well as other draft work under ==Hiram Maxim’s=={Q315601} United States Electric Lighting Company. At this time, the company was a direct competitor to Edison’s Electric Light Company, and Latimer had such extensive knowledge on drafting and securing patents. When it came time to move on to another job, Latimer began to work at Edison Electric Light Company. As an important function of Edison’s legal team, Latimer demonstrated exceptional abilities for drafting and he was also an exceptional inventor and engineer. Granted a total of seven patents within his lifetime (some of them with co-inventors), Latimer devised patent number 147,363 a water-closet that facilitated the use of toilets on trains, patent number 247,097 which improved incandescent lamps, and patent number 334,078 which was an apparatus for cooling and disinfecting the air as the wind blew the air through it, among many other inventions. With so much experience and success within the patent industry, Latimer quickly rose to the status of a prominent inventor, and in 1885, he was the only Black member of the Edison Pioneers, an elite club of innovators that honored the legacy and preserved the accomplishments of Thomas A. Edison. 

.ve-media default:https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/32/ae/c2/3924bda2b9d2fe/US147363-drawings-page-1.png left 80% caption="U.S.  Patent 147,363"

.ve-media default:https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/c9/47/14/f70493554cb503/US247097-drawings-page-1.png right 80% caption="U.S. Patent 247,097"


## Shelby Davidson (1868-1931)
.ve-media wc:Shelby_Jeames_Davidson%2C_attorney-at-law.jpg 20% left caption="Shelby J. Davidson"
Born in 1868, three years after the end of the Civil War, ==Shelby J. Davidson=={Q97141688} stands out from other inventors by his desire to use invention to advance his career rather than only to contribute to an industry. Davidson received more formal education than most Black inventors at the time, as well as possessing a quality personal network. This personal network helped him to secure a job at the Department of Treasury through the help of a personal friend and mentor, Kentucky Congressman [William C.P. Breckenridge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Campbell_Preston_Breckinridge#:~:text=William%20Campbell%20Preston%20Breckinridge%20August,Breckinridge.). While this job quickly granted him a number of promotions, Davidson would eventually reach the office of the Auditor for the Post Office where he would establish himself as the Chief-Clerk of the adding machines of his unit. By the time Davidson joined this division, the adding machines were constantly breaking down, and real auditors had to perform handwritten calculations that were sometimes incorrect, which impacted productivity. Seeing a clear need to improve these machines, Davidson became in charge of all of the repairs and adjustments to the adding machines. 
.ve-media default:https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/ec/16/17/23499431a03dd1/US884721-drawings-page-1.png right 40% caption="U.S. Patent No. 884,721"
By the time he filed his first patent for an adding machine add-on device, Davidson was already a well-established expert in the area. His expertise and ingenuity certainly granted him a number of opportunities, including the ability to work directly with adding machine companies as well as the ability to move up the bureaucratic ladder of federal jobs. Davidson was not immune to the racist historical events of the early 20th century. Upon becoming president, Woodrow Wilson re-instituted segregation in the civil service, and as a new and unimpressed auditor was appointed, Davidson was stripped of his managerial and supervisory position. Having to watch the new auditor strike down his accomplishments in public, even though he built a new adding and auditing system from the ground up, while also being forced to a segregated area of the office, Davidson eventually resigned from his position in 1912, though he would move on to practice law, own a number of real estate properties, and even be named the president of the General Alumni Association of Howard University.


[^1]: [Granville T. Woods, the Brooklyn Historic Railway Association](https://www.brooklynrail.net/Granville_Woods.html)