## Introduction
As hidden figures within the world of invention, many inventors often fought for recognition of their ideas and contributions in the form of exhibitions such as the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition or the Chicago’s World Fair. It was important to acknowledge that the space for women and inventors of color was different reflecting their experiences with inventions and patenting. These exhibitions offered an opportunity to recognize and applaud the participation of marginalized inventors in advancing America as a whole. As new inventions correlated strongly with a better quality of life, it becomes important to identify moments in which these contributors were honored as well as when they were deliberately concealed. 

## Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition (1876)

.ve-media wc:MainBuilding.jpg left 40% caption="View of the Main Building from the Jury Pavilion"

One of the first international commemorations of women’s progress in the inventive industry was with the ==Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition of 1876=={Q984109} that displayed 74 inventions made by women along with other displays focusing on  women’s achievements in the arts, education, and other sciences. The Philadelphia Centennial was an opportunity for women all over the country to demonstrate their ability to contribute to the economy in similar capacities as men, and succeed in realms outside of the home.Though it was an incredible achievement and demonstration of talent to be included in a world’s fair, the success of the exhibition came at a great cost to the women that were responsible for creating it. In a struggle emblematic of the greater inequality between men and women inventors, exhibition as spaces in the fair quickly filled up with other exhibits from men (both national and international) in the early planning stages with exhibits and there had been little space available  women. As the opening of the fair grew closer, women inventors learned that there was no space available for them to exhibit. If they wanted to be included in the fair, it would be entirely up to the women and the women’s committee to erect an new building on their own without any funding. ==Elizabeth Duane Gillespie=={Q119433081} (Benjamin Franklin’s great granddaughter), the head of the Women’s Committee, along with a number of other members and participants, took on the task managed to raise $31,000 in four months for the construction of a Women's Pavilion.They also collected 82,000 signatures that pressured Congress into lending $1.5 million for the project. Even in fundraising, women inventors and other volunteers showed resilience in the face of obstacles of space and funding.. Though the exhibit was a step in the right direction, especially after the widespread support for the women that had resulted from it, the exhibition still demonstrated that there was a long way to go in terms of equality. 

## Patent Office Centennial (1891)
Celebrating the 100 year anniversary, a year late, of the passing of the Patent Act of 1790, the Patent Office Centennial of 1891 was meant to be the federal government’s celebration of the achievements that came from the passage of the  Patent Act which protected and promoted the development of intellectual property. . However, inventions from women and inventors of color were noticeably absent, despite the flourishing of women and inventors of color in this time period, including Mary Walton, Margaret Knight, and Lewis Latimer.  It appeared that the Patent Office either deliberately silenced the contributions of marginalized inventors or they did not care about h the struggles of women and inventors of color at this time.. In one example, the first volume of The Woman Inventor, actually the same article that mentions inventor Ellen Eglin previously, there is an illustration on the front page of women in protest against a group of men in what might be the Patent Office in Washington D.C.. the caption  reads, “Women as industrial and inventive factors plead for recognition at the convention of the Patent Centennial...”. The article opens with, 
“The ‘Woman Inventor’ greets the members and visitors of the Patent Centennial Convention and presents this number the first ever published and devoted to the cause of woman inventors of this country. Its aims and objects are to aid, elevate, and dignify the industrial and inventive women of the United States…We...ask for women inventors that a spacious hall be set aside in the present Patent Office and be exclusively used for the exhibition of women’s inventions…We ask also that none but women be employed in that department of exhibition and publication.”, 
Sadly, neither of these objectives were ever realized in the exhibition. An entire article arguing for the inclusion of women inventors in the Patent Centennial, The Woman Inventor suggested that the Patent Office was aware that there was a demand for the promotion and distinction of women’s inventions though perhaps not enough to include it in the Centennial. 

## Chicago's Columbian Exposition (1893)
Perhaps because it followed the famed world expositions of France and England, Chicago’s Columbian Exposition was, from its very onset, meant to be the biggest and greatest exposition in the United States to date. Drawing hundreds of thousands of people from all over the world, the Chicago Columbian Exposition, also known as the World’s Fair, reserved spaces for a multitude of topics, one of which was dedicated to invention; and a space reserved for women’s inventions, called “Woman’s Building”. rom start to finish the entire project had been managed by women and the building designed and built by female architects. It included women's arts and hobbies, and even most notably, the famous automatic dishwasher which had been patented by Josephine Cochrane in 1887, considered to be one of the greatest technological advancements of the time. Though women in the exhibit had put forth a face of massive intellect and advancement, there had still been a deep racial divide behind the project.. The committee in charge of the exhibit was largely made up of upper class White women, who actively barred women of color from participating. As America sought to show a very specific image to other countries participating in the fair, from the very beginning it had barred Black Americans from obtaining any positions of management in the fair, and they were employed only for manual labor. The failure of the World’s Fair to provide  Black Americans with an opportunity to display their contributions to their country, America sought to erase their history and contributions to inventing.

## Louisiana Purchase Exposition (1904) and After
While previous expositions were dedicated to showcasing progress and intellectual development, following the Chicago Columbian Exposition of 1893, the expositions began to take on far more racist tones. These expositions were seen as a way to demonstrate to the rest of the world the achievements of White Americans as well as they purposefully showcased the “backwardness” of all other races and ethnicities. As the Anthropology Department of the exhibit established what was basically a human zoo, on its “Anthropology Days”, it forced different groups of people like the Filipinos, the Congolese, and even Native Americans to compete against each other in a number of races and competitions. . By displaying these groups of people as savage or primitive, the exhibition got away with spreading racism and imperialist ideals that encouraged the greater subjugation of other races around the world, continuing to establish white supremacy and Western cultural dominance. In many ways, it undid the progress that other exhibitions had started.

## Henry Baker and "The Negro As An Inventor"
Born in 1857, Henry E. Baker stands out among all of these inventors, because unlike all of the others, Baker wasn’t actually an inventor. Baker is actually known in the world of invention for the invaluable research that he did on the inventors themselves, here specifically, Black American inventors.e joined the U.S. Patent Office in 1877, shortly before attending the polytechnic institute of the National University in Washington. Baker began his work on Black inventors after determining that there was very little information available on Black inventors in the patenting system,likely because patent applications did not identify race and so there was no real incentive for Black inventors to reveal that. Baker, taking it upon himself to bring awareness to Black inventions and inventors, actually contacted at least 12,000 patent attorneys, company presidents, newspaper editors, and other prominent figures in the industry about Black inventors they knew or had worked with.. Though he reached out to many people, a large portion of them completely disregarded Black inventions or stated that they had never heard Black inventors or expected that any existed.or. Despite this negative response, however,Baker was still able to discover more than 1,200 Black inventors, 800 of which granted him permission to reveal their identities and race. This would eventually lead Baker to publish his work and findings in an article titled “The Negro As An Inventor” which outlined a number of Black inventions as well as the unique challenges that Black inventors faced in the extremely racialized environments of the 19th and 20th centuries. t, Baker was an important figure in the world of patenting and invention that sought to bring forth recognition and credit to formerly anonymous inventors who, because of their race, had never received the accolades for their work. As he turned over his findings to a number of exhibits that later showcased the talent and inventive spirit of Black inventors, Baker is credited with commemorating and promoting the inventions of Black inventors not only in his time but also into the future through the reach of his writing. 

