# Edison, gender, and race

## Introduction

By the end of his career, Thomas A. Edison had amassed a total of 1,093 formal patents. Of these, his most notable inventions were the phonograph, the incandescent light bulb, the alkaline storage battery, and a number of other things. As these gave Edison prominence and support and allowed him to continue his line of work, many other inventors—like White women, Black women, and Black men—were slow to rise to this level of success. Barred by social, political, or economic obstacles, underrepresented inventors often did not have the same resources or rights to be able to participate in the inventive process to the extent that someone as successful as Edison did. As this exhibit aims to demonstrate, there were a number of exclusive experiences, struggles, and accomplishments by these marginalized groups within the world of inventing that largely set them apart from Edison’s own. 

## Background

At the turn of the 18th century, not long after America had gained its independence, the first patent act was passed in Congress. Titled [“An Act to promote the Progrefs of useful Arts”](https://prologue.blogs.archives.gov/2015/03/11/inventing-in-congress-patent-law-since-1790/#:~:text=On%20January%2022%2C%201790%2C%20Congress,of%20Science%20and%20useful%20Arts.%E2%80%9D&text=On%20April%2010%2C%201790%2C%20President,signed%20the%20bill%20into%20law), the Patents Act established legally-protected intellectual property rights in an effort to fuel the economy as well as the overall quality of life through innovation. Here, due to the fact that women and slaves around this time were not allowed to own property, and because they were often discouraged from going to school or gaining valuable working experience in order to invent, these groups faced great obstacles when it came to inventing. 

Although White women’s property rights advanced at a much faster pace than for those of people of color (regardless of gender), White women still experienced a slow rise to legal protections and equality. Here, the most progressive legislation for women’s property rights in the 20th century came out of New York’s [“Married Women’s Property Act”](https://www.thoughtco.com/property-rights-of-women-3529578) of 1848, nearly 72 years after the Declaration of Independence, which finally allowed for married women to conduct business on their own and own property in what was known as a “separate economy”. Only three years prior had New York even granted women the ability to own, protect, and earn money from their patents as if they were [“unmarried”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Married_Women%27s_Property_Acts_in_the_United_States#:~:text=Indiana%2C%20and%20Iowa.-,New%20York,it%20%22as%20if%20unmarried%22.). In a timeline that showed how women’s property rights lagged behind those of men, it becomes easy to see how White male inventors had the biggest advantage over any other group.

The group with perhaps the least advantages and legal protections, however, were the enslaved inventors who were completely denied the ability by either them or their slave master to patent any of their ideas. As inventions by any Black person, free or not, were met with an enormous amount of racism and discrimination, even more than that were the actual court rulings prior to emancipation that legally forbade a slave or slaveowner from submitting a patent. In 1857, for example, U.S. Attorney General Jeremiah Black==Q742459== denied a patent to Oscar J. E. Stuart’s slave Ned, under the grounds that he had no protections or legal entitlements due to his status as a slave. Though his invention, a double plow, would have saved time and money in the cotton industry, when Oscar J. E. Stuart filed the petition on his behalf the Attorney General told him, “...a machine invented by a slave, though it be new and useful, cannot, in the present state of the law, be patented. I may add that if such a patent were issued to the master, it would not protect him in courts against persons who might infringe it.”. Here, even though [Oscar J. E. Stuart](https://www.historynet.com/whose-patent-is-it-american-patent-law-denies-slave-creativity.htm) would move on to manufacture and sell the device anyways, this moment in history reflected society’s lack of support for Black invention and ultimately, neither Oscar J. E. Stuart nor Ned would be able to patent the device.
