# White Women Inventors

.ve-iframe https://archive.org/embed/0003WOM left width=70%
Although White women’s property rights advanced at a much faster pace than for those of people of color (regardless of gender), White women still experienced a slow rise to legal protections and equality. The most progressive legislation for women’s property rights in the 20th century came out of [New York’s “Married Women’s Property Act” of 1848](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Married_Women%27s_Property_Acts_in_the_United_States#cite_note-khan-8), nearly 72 years after the Declaration of Independence, which finally allowed for married women to conduct business on their own and own property in what was known as a “separate economy”. The pressure to pass this legislation in New York was led by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, and many others. Only three years prior had New York even granted women the ability to own, protect, and earn money from their patents as if they were “unmarried”. However, as has been discussed elsewhere, the Women's Rights Convention, and its leaders, [eventually jetttisoned the concerns and experiences of Black women.](https://www.nps.gov/articles/black-women-and-the-fight-for-voting-rights.htm#:~:text=During%20the%2019th%20and%2020th,gain%20the%20right%20to%20vote)

As White women were kept out of workspaces or apprenticeships that could have formally cultivated their innovative abilities, they often worked within the industries and produced inventions in less formal ways. Whether this meant working lower-ranking jobs in textile mills or having family members that directly worked in the manufacturing or inventive industry, women rarely had opportunities to work in spaces solely dedicated to invention. But White women continued to utilize their networks and industry knowledge to patent remarkable inventions, despite the lack of research space or formal education.Between 1865 and 1900 women obtained 5,549 patents, though this may be less than the actual number.[^1]

## Mary Walton
Not much is known about the life of Mary Walton beyond her inventions to limit polllution casued by elevated trains in New York City. She was the owner of a boarding house located near the [Gilbert Elevated Railway](https://www.gothamcenter.org/blog/rufus-gilberts-elevated-pneumatic-tubes) in New York. With her experience as a boarding house owner and her abilities to determine the cause of these mechanical problems, Walton filed, and was granted, patent number 221,880 in 1879,  an anti-pollution device that held the pollutants in the water before disposing of them safely in the city sewage system. In 1891, in an effort to solve the noise problem, Walton boarded a train , and though ridiculed for making observations, she created, and was granted, patent number 237,422, a noise-proofing device that muffled the vibrations of the train as it went over the tracks. Though the city did request Edison's help, Walton found the solution first.  Walton eventually sold the rights of these inventions to the city,  which were later used by other railroad companies. Her hard work and ingenuity is credited with creating the functionalibility of the New York City Metropolitan Railroad that we know today. 
.ve-media default:https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/8a/9d/23/3c54c7abcd91c3/US221880-drawings-page-1.png width=50% left caption="Patent No. 221,880"

.ve-media wc:Patent_Drawing_for_M._E._Walton%27s_Locomotive_and_Other_Chimneys_-_NARA_-_12007670.jpg width=50% right caption="Patent No. 237,422"

## Margaret Knight (1838-1914)
.ve-media wc:Margaret_knight_boston_sunday_post_march_31_1912_p.45.jpg left width=50% caption="Margaret Knight in Sunday Post, March 31, 1912"
==Margaret Knight=={Q431518} was given the nickname of “Lady Edison”, and created her first invention at twelve. She worked in the cotton mills and watched her family members operate the machines, she devised a way to stop the steel-tipped shuttles of textile looms from falling off and hurting the operator. By the time of her death, Knight had been awarded a groundbreaking 87 patents, the most notable of which was patent number 220,925 which remarkably improved the creation of the paper bags that we use today. She also successfully patented other inventions in the rubber, cotton, and shoe industry. Knight was working and inventing in the same time period of Edison, and both were comparable in the frequency and longevity of their inventions. She faced a number of legal challenges in order to discredit her work, but was able to prove to the courts that her work was her own. A demonstration of the capabilities that women possessed outside of formal training or funding, Margaret Knight reminds us how resilient women were in the inventive process regardless of endorsements and even in the face of trials and tribulations. 

.ve-media wc:US109224-Improvement_in_paper-feeding_machines_%282%29.jpg width=50% left caption="U.S. Patent No. 109,224"

.ve-media wc:US220925-Paper_bag_machine_%284%29.jpg width=50% right caption="U.S. Patent No. 220,925"

## Beulah Henry (1887-1973)
.ve-media wc:%22Lady_Edison%22_with_latest_invention-_an_air_baby_doll_that_can_be_bathed._Miss_Beulah_Louise_Henry%2C_of_North_Carolina_and_a_direct_descendent_of_Patrick_Henry%2C_is_often_called_the_%22Lady_LCCN2016888541.jpg left width=50%
==Beulah Henry=={Q41582}, another “Lady Edison”, and an "inventor genius" was another example of how women carved a space for themselves even within an industry mostly reserved for men. Supported by her well-to-do parents, she was able to patent her first invention, an ice cream maker, in 1912. After that invention, she moved with her family to New York City, and connected with model makers, patent attorneys, and retailers. Through these connections, she established herself as a professional inventor, accepting regular speaking arrangents, and was regularly featured in interviews in glossy magazines. [^2] She followed the success of her first patent with manyother important patents in the handbag, umbrella, and sewing industries. But it was in the typewriter industry that she made the most impact. She  invented a protograph, a device that enabled a typewriter to make four copies of a paper without carbon copies, along with 12 other patents that later facilitated the use of the typewriter. She retired having patented 49 inventions, but had invented around 110.

.ve-media default:https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/10/ef/df/4b4b95229946da/US1037762-drawings-page-1.png width=50% left caption="U.S. Patent No. 103,7762"
.ve-media default:https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/e9/2f/ad/b4c84ea14dba9a/US1889657-drawings-page-1.png width=50% right caption="U.S. Patent No. 188,9657"