.ve-header "Race Gender, and the American Patent System in the Age of Edison" https://edisondigital.rutgers.edu/iiif/PAT252386 "A Digital Exhibit" pct:10,50,150,150 sticky 

# Black Men and Women in the Patent System
.ve-media wc:Smithsonian_Building_NR.jpg left width=80% caption="Smithsonian Institute"
In 2016, the Smithsonian’s [Lemelson Center for the study of Invention and Innovation](https://invention.si.edu/) held a [webinar series](https://invention.si.edu/black-inventors-and-innovators-new-perspectives) that examined and discussed the inventions and creations of Black inventors in the history of the United States. From these discussions, it became clear cultural heritage institutions have played a significant role in downplaying the inventions and creativity of Black inventors, due to a too narrow definition of American innovation. Rayvon Fouché, an African-American historian of technology, argued that invention narratives “prioritize efficiency, improvement, dominion, and power, often overlooking those forms of invention that do not receive patents and that prioritize art, expression, morality and spirituality.”[^1] . 

Read more about Rayvon Fouche's work [here:](https://www.rayvonfouche.com/)

.ve-media https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NC7RcXNCsLI right width=60% caption="Webinar on Commercialization and Institutions from the Smithsonian's Lemelson Center"
You can watch the webinar on Commercialization and Institutions from the Smithsonian’s Lemelson Center on this topic to the right. 

Scholars have argued that Black inventions have been overlooked by history because those inventions were not efficient machines that would replace human or animal labor. These conclusions are based on research that enslaved [African Americans built planting and irrigation systems on the plantations; developed medicines and methods for preserving food, and created practical objects for obtaining and storing food](https://invention.si.edu/node/29159/p/740-brief-history). 

Although the Patent Act of 1790 allowed for Black inventors to patent their ideas, this only applied to free Black people, as enslaved Black people had no legal rights. It has been documented that, prior to the Civil War, White people claimed or appropriated the inventions of enslaved Black people. After the Civil War, and the abolition of slavery, all Black Americans were legally able to patent their inventions. However, they continued to face ingrained structural racism and violence.

In a new database on inventors of the Golden Age of Invention, from 1870 to 1940, published in 2019 by the ==Brookings Institution=={Q929154}, the data revealed:

- “Black people living in the North were eight times more linkely to be awarded a patent than Black people living in the south” 
- “Black people filed a majority of patents in the North”
- “In the North, Black people’s share of patents equaled their share of population”
- “With more than 50,000 total patents, Black people accounted for more inventions during this period than immigrants from every country except England and Germany” [^1]

.ve-media default:https://invention.si.edu/sites/default/files/new-perspectives-black-inventors-innovators-2020-report-cook-lisa-black-v-white-patents-1870-1940-JEG2014-750-inline-edit.jpg right width=80% caption="Patents by Black and White Inventors after 1900"

This data reframes the role of Black Americans in the Industrial Revolution as robust participants in both invention and patenting. However, there is a sharp decline in patents by Black inventors after 1900, which coincided with the prevalance of Jim Crow laws and lynchings.  Fouché argues that the “black inventor myth” is made up of four main themes: 
1. Patent equals financial success;
2. Black inventors were race champions and invented to uplift the race; 
3. A patent by a black inventor is one of a kind; 
4. All black inventors have similar racial experiences[^3]


This myth “produces disembodied icons celebrated merely for their patented material production,” and “conceals the difficulties they endured while gaining the patent protection” (p. 65). Fouché wrote about the Granville T. Woods, Lewis H. Latimer, and Shelby J. Davidson in 2005 in his book [Black Inventors in the Age of Segregation](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Race_After_the_Internet/aOiSAgAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&pg=PA61&printsec=frontcover), the same three inventors that appear in this visual essay. 

Both Granville Woods and Lewis Latimer worked in the same fields of invention as Thomas Edison, telegraphy and lighting, respectively. But their experiences, from Edison, and from each other, were radically different. Latimer's career developed as he worked for and with some of the well-known White inventors at the time, inventing more often than he was patenting. Woods, on the other hand, known as the "Black Edison," quickly patented and sold many of his inventions, to stay financially solvent. Similar to Edison, he faced major legal challenges, but without the finanical and community support.  Davidson, however, had a completely different experience than both Woods and Latimer. Working as the Chief-Clerk of Adding Machines at the office of Auditor for the Post Office, he established himself as an expert in adding machines, and patented his invention that improved this process. 

## Henry Baker and “The Negro As An Inventor”

.ve-media wc:Henry_Edwin_Baker.jpg  right width=70%
 Baker found 1,200 inventions from African American inventors, and confirmed 800 of them. Born in 1857, Henry E. Baker stands out among all of these inventors, because unlike all of the others, Baker wasn’t actually an inventor. Baker is actually known in the world of invention for the invaluable research on Black American inventors. He joined the U.S. Patent Office in 1877, shortly before attending the polytechnic institute of the National University in Washington. Baker began his work on Black inventors after determining that there was very little information available on Black inventors in the patenting system, likely because patent applications did not identify race and so there was no real incentive for Black inventors to reveal it. Baker contacted at least 12,000 patent attorneys, company presidents, newspaper editors, and other prominent figures in the industry about Black inventors they knew or had worked with.
 
Though he reached out to many people, a large portion of them completely disregarded Black inventions, stated that they had never heard Black inventors or expected that any existed. Despite this negative response, Baker was still able to discover more than 1,200 Black inventors, 800 of which granted him permission to reveal their identities and race. Baker published his work and findings in an article titled “The Negro As An Inventor” which outlined a number of Black inventions as well as the unique challenges that Black inventors faced in the extremely racist environments of the 19th and 20th centuries. 

.ve-iframe https://archive.org/embed/twentiethcentury00culp/page/n577/mode/1up  left width= 40%

On the left is a chapter on Henry Baker, from the book *Twentieth Century Negro Literature; or A cyclopedia of thought on the vital topics relating to the American Negro* [sic] provided by the Internet Archive. It futher explains the Baker's important work in recording the contributions of Black people to the history of patents. 

Baker was an important figure in the world of patenting and invention that sought to bring forth recognition and credit to formerly anonymous inventors who, because of their race, had never received the accolades for their work. His research was used by a number of exhibits that later showcased the talent and inventive spirit of Black inventors. Baker is credited with commemorating and promoting the inventions of Black inventors not only in his time but also into the future through the reach of his writing.

Both Granville Woods and Lewis Latimer worked in the same fields of invention as Thomas Edison, telegraphy and lighting, respectively. But their experiences, from Edison, and from each other, were radically different. Latimer's career developed as he worked for and with some of the well-known White inventors at the time, inventing more often than he was patenting. Woods, on the other hand, known as the "Black Edison," quickly patented and sold many of his inventions, to stay financially solvent. Similar to Edison, he faced major legal challenges, but without the finanical and community support.  Davidson, however, had a completely different experience than both Woods and Latimer. Working as the Chief-Clerk of Adding Machines at the office of Auditor for the Post Office, he established himself as an expert in adding machines, and patented his invention that improved this process. 


[^1]:https://invention.si.edu/node/29159/p/741-underrepresentation
[^2]:https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-black-innovators-who-elevated-the-united-states-reassessing-the-golden-age-of-invention/
[^3]:Black Inventors in the Age of Segregation in the (pp. 64-65)
[^4]:Black Inventors in the Age of Segregation in the (p. 65)

